---
# Page settings
layout: default
keywords: email, css, html, framework, boilerplate, grid, campaigns, templates, bojler, slicejack
comments: false

# Hero section
title: Getting started
description: In this section you'll find features and support table, basic information about Bojler and how to use it properly. If you're first time user then you should read this first.

# Micro navigation
micro_nav: true

# Page navigation
page_nav:
    next:
        content: Typography
        url: /typography
---

## Introduction
Bojler is an email framework for developing responsive and lightweight email templates that will render correctly across each of the most popular email clients.

If you have experience with email template development, you know how painful it is to build a perfect email template that works across all email clients.

To make it easier for you to develop responsive and lightweight email templates we have created Bojler.

## Clone, Install and Run
This is an installation process that you should follow when developing email templates with Bojler for the first time. Follow instructions step by step to get best understanding of it.

### Clone the repo
<div class="callout callout--warning">
    <p><strong>Install <a href="//git-scm.com" target="blank">Git</a></strong> Bojler uses <a href="//git-scm.com" target="blank">Git</a> as version control system and <a href="//github.com" target="blank">GitHub</a> as a code hosting platform. <a href="//git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git" target="blank">Here</a> you can find <a href="//git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git" target="blank">full installation guide</a> on how to install Git.</p>
</div>

Clone repository to create a local copy on your computer with this command:

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/Slicejack/bojler.git
```

### Install node packages
<div class="callout callout--warning">
    <p><strong>Install <a href="//nodejs.org" target="blank">Node.js</a></strong> Bojler uses <a href="//nodejs.org" target="blank">Node.js</a> to automate SASS compile and CSS inlining. Please install <a href="//nodejs.org" target="blank">Node.js</a> before you proceed to packages installation.</p>
</div>

Before you can use Bojler, as SASS compiler and CSS inliner with webserver and live reload, you have to install node packages with all dependencies.

Run this commands to enter newly cloned directory and to install node packages with all dependencies:

```sh
$ cd bojler # Go into newly cloned directory
$ npm install # Install node packages and dependencies
```

### Run the Bojler 🔥
Now you're ready to run the Bojler and start working on your email template. Here is table with all the commands you can use with Bojler:

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th style="min-width: 250px;">Command</th>
            <th>Description</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td><code>npm run gulp</code></td>
            <td>This command will process and build all the files from <code>/source</code> to <code>/public</code> directory.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><code>npm run gulp dev</code></td>
            <td><p>This command starts development mode. While you're in development mode you have webserver with live reload, SASS compiler and CSS inlining up and running.</p> Bojler will process and build all files from <code>/source</code> to <code>/public</code> directory everytime you make and save changes in your <code>.html</code> or <code>.scss</code> files.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><code>npm run gulp clean</code></td>
            <td>This command removes all files generated by previous 2 commands.</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

## Features
This is a list of all the features we've implemented to Bojler. Few of them have their own sections in this documentation, we recommend you to read them all.

### SASS support 🎉
Write <a href="http://sass-lang.com" target="blank">SASS</a> and Bojler will compile it to CSS. You can write your SASS inside `/source/sass` directory.

Make sure you have `inlined.scss` and `embedded.scss` files inside your `/source/sass` directory, otherwise Bojler will not be able to compile SASS to CSS.

<div class="callout callout--info">
    <p><strong>Use existing <a href="/getting-started#directory-structure">directory structure</a>.</strong> We recommend you to use existing <a href="/getting-started#directory-structure">directory structure</a>. Best way to add new SASS/CSS is to import new files (partials) to <code>inlined.scss</code> and <code>embedded.scss</code> files.</p>
</div>

### Automatic CSS inlining
Some email clients strip out `<head>` and `<style>` tags from emails, so it’s best to have your CSS written inline within your markup. We know that writing inline CSS is time consuming and repetitive, so we automated it!

Bojler automatically inline your newly compiled CSS to your `.html` files. All you have to do is write your SASS/CSS inside `inlined.scss` and Bojler will take care of everything else.

<div class="callout callout--info">
    <p><strong>What about media queries?</strong> Bojler pulls out all media queries and groups them in <code>&lt;head&gt;</code> of your <code>.html</code> file.</p>
</div>

### Embedded CSS
Bojler have file called `embedded.scss` that will embed SASS/CSS inside it to `<head>` of your template.

You don't have to write media queries here, Bojler automatically groups and embed them from `inlined.scss` to `<head>`.

### Webserver with Live Reload
When you [run development mode](getting-started#run-the-bojler-) Bojler starts webserver with Live Reload.

Now you don't have to refresh your browser every time you make and save changes in your `.html` and `.scss`files, Bojler will do it for you.

After you run development mode your email `.html` files will be served at `http://localhost:8000/`

### Reset styles
Reset styles are great starting point for your email template development. They fix all well known bugs in various email clients.

<div class="callout callout--info">
    <p><strong>Where I can find reset styles?</strong> If you want to read more or add new reset styles you can find them in <code>/source/sass/generic/reset.scss</code>.</p>
</div>

### Responsive
Bojler is responsive and ready for mobile devices and tablets.

We suggest you to use this media query when building responsive emails:

```scss
@media (max-width: $breakpoint-mobile) {}
```

### Typography
Bojler includes simple and easily customized typography for headings, table cells and lists.

To read more about [Typography](/typography) please go to it's own [section here](/typography).

### Grid system
Bojler uses 12-column grid with a 600px container.
On mobile devices (under 640px wide), columns become full width and stack vertically.

To read more about [Grid system](/grid-system) please go to it's own [section here](/grid-system).

### Utility classes
High-specificity, very explicit selectors and helper classes. We use them to easily manipulate with things such as alignments and images.

To read more about [Utility classes](/utility-classes) please go to their own [section here](/utility-classes).

### Components
Components are pre-made blocks of code which you can use to build your own email template. These components are optional and other things don’t depend on them.

To read more about [Components](/components) please go to their own [section here](/components).

## Directory structure
Everything you want to know about directory structure can be found here:

```sh
bojler/
├── source/ # Directory with source files that will compile to /public directory.
│   ├── sass/ # Directory with SASS files that will compile to CSS and get inlined.
│   │   ├── components/ # Pre-made blocks of code which you can use to build your own email template.
│   │   ├── generic/ # Low-specificity, far-reaching rulesets (e.g. resets).
│   │   ├── objects/ # Objects, abstractions, and design patterns.
│   │   ├── tools/ # Site-wide mixins and functions.
│   │   ├── utilities/ # High-specificity, very explicit selectors.
│   │   ├── _variables.scss # All SASS variables in one place.
│   │   ├── embedded.scss # Embedded CSS comes from this file.
│   │   └── inlined.scss # Inlined CSS comes from this file.
│   └── email.html # Main email template.
├── .eslintrc # ESlint configuration file.
├── .gitignore # Git related file which specifies intentionally untracked files to ignore.
├── CHANGELOG.md # All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
├── CONTRIBUTING.md # Contributing guide.
├── LICENSE # Project license.
├── README.md # Quick start guide.
├── gulpfile.js # Gulp configuration file.
└── package.json # This file contains meta data about npm modules.
```

## Compatibility
We have tested Bojler on numerous email clients and devices. In table below you can see what's supported:

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Email clients</th>
            <th>Web email clients</th>
            <th>Mobile devices</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>
                Apple Mail 7<br>
                Apple Mail 8<br>
                Outlook 2000<br>
                Outlook 2002<br>
                Outlook 2003<br>
                Outlook 2007<br>
                Outlook 2010<br>
                Outlook 2011<br>
                Outlook 2013<br>
                Outlook 2016
            </td>
            <td>
                Gmail<br>
                Google Apps<br>
                Office 365<br>
                Outlook.com<br>
                Yahoo! Mail
            </td>
            <td>
                Android 4.4<br>
                iPhone 5<br>
                iPhone 6<br>
                iPad<br>
                iPad Mini
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

## Best practices
### Follow [this](https://www.campaignmonitor.com/css/) email CSS guide
On [this link](https://www.campaignmonitor.com/css/) you can find a complete breakdown of the CSS support for the top 10 most popular mobile, web and desktop email clients on the planet. It is recommended to use it as often as possible.

### DPI Scaling in Outlook 2007-2013
If you need to solve issues with DPI Scaling in Outlook 2007-2013 please refer to [this thread](https://litmus.com/community/discussions/151-mystery-solved-dpi-scaling-in-outlook-2007-2013) and [this article](https://blog.jmwhite.co.uk/2014/03/28/solving-dpi-scaling-issues-with-html-email-in-outlook/).

<div class="callout callout--info">
    <p><strong>Support for VML and images is already implemented.</strong> We've already implemented solution to make VML and images scale properly, as you can see <a href="https://github.com/Slicejack/bojler/blob/master/source/email.html" target="blank">here</a>.</p>
</div>

### Compress and optimize your images
It’s also a really great idea to try to keep your entire email as small as humanly possible: under 100kb is ideal but not always possible, under 250kb is pretty standard.

Use a compression app like [compressor.io](https://compressor.io/) to cut all your images down to size as much as possible before you send. Slower load times, especially on mobile, can make or break your email if the overall file size is too large.

<div class="callout callout--info">
    <p><strong>How to use images locally?</strong> We recommend you to add <code>/assets</code> directory containing your images inside <code>/public</code> directory. Bojler will not delete your <code>/assets</code> directory on build or during development mode.</p>
	<p>Also <code>npm run gulp clean</code> command will not delete your <code>/assets</code> directory.</p>
</div>

### Test your email properly
Before you send your HTML email you should test it properly. We recommend you to use [Litmus](http://litmus.com) or [Email on Acid](https://www.emailonacid.com).

### Send your email properly
Best way to send your HTML email would be using an Email Service Provider (ESP) such as [MailChimp](http://www.mailchimp.com) or [Campaign Monitor](https://www.campaignmonitor.com/). If you’re just running a quick test we recommend you to use [Putsmail](https://putsmail.com/).

## Change Log
All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/).

### [2.2.0] - 2018-01-09
##### Changed
- Allow use of subdirectories (#54).

### [2.1.2] - 2017-08-07
##### Fixed
- Inline source issue fixed (#53).

### [2.1.1] - 2017-08-07
##### Fixed
- Images path issue (#51).

### [2.1.0] - 2017-08-02
##### Added
- Embedded CSS (#41).
- Assets directory (#21).

##### Changed
- Updated `package.json` w/ licence and reporsitory fields (#49).
- Responsive images (#45).
- Images vertical alignment updated (#38).
- Updated meta tags (#47).
- Comments updated (#48).

##### Fixed
- Disabled shorthands (#44).

##### Removed
- Removed `.image-fix` from `_reset.scss` (#40).

### [2.0.5] - 2017-07-26
##### Fixed
- Hero component vertical alignment issue (Outlook 2007.) fixed.
- `no-gutter` class issue fixed.

### [2.0.4] - 2017-07-24
##### Fixed
- Specified `.first` and `.last` classes styles only to columns.

##### Changed
- Updated `$breakpoint-mobile` to `$grid-container-width`.
- Converted space indentations to tabs.

##### Added
- Added `font-smoothing` for better typography in web browsers.
- Added images `line-height` fix utility.

##### Removed
- Removed tables utility classes.
- Removed spacing utility classes.

### [2.0.3] - 2017-07-18
##### Changed
- System fonts selector updated.

##### Added
- Outlook system fonts stack fallback implemented.

### [2.0.2] - 2017-07-17
##### Fixed
- Gulp stylesheet tags issue.

##### Changed
- Buttons text alignment.
- `body-table-spacing` on small screens.

##### Added
- Headings utility classes.

### [2.0.1] - 2017-07-11
##### Fixed
- No gutter columns issue w/ inlined CSS.

### [2.0.0] - 2017-06-28
ℹ️ We've started versioning project from this version.

##### Changed
- Added information about v2.0.0 to README.md.

##### Added
- SASS support.
- Automatic CSS inlining.
- Webserver with Live Reload.
- ESlinter config file.
- Change Log.
- Guidelines for contributing.

### [1.0.0] ⚠️ Old version
Old version of Bojler can be found [here](https://github.com/Slicejack/bojler/tree/v1).
